
Chapter 4
Environmental Impact of Energy Sources
	4.1	Emission Hazard
	4.1.1	Indoor Pollutants
Household combustion of coal or biomass (e.g.; dung, charcoal, wood, crop residues) can cause emission hazards. These fuels are used for household cooking and heating. Solid fuels are burned in inefficient simple stoves and in poorly ventilated conditions. The disease burden from solid fuel use is most significant in populations with inadequate access to clean fuels, particularly poor households in rural areas of developing countries. Women and their youngest children are most exposed because of their household roles.
   In simple stoves, biomass fuels emit substantial amounts of health-damaging pollutants, including respirable particulates, carbon monoxide, nitrogen oxides, benzene, formaldehyde, 1,3 butadiene, and polyaromatic compounds such as benzo(?)pyrene. Depending on their quality, coal fuels may also emit sulphur oxides and other toxic elements, including arsenic, lead and fluorine. Coals smoke produces all the above plus, depending on coal quality, sulphur oxides and such toxic elements as arsenic, lead, fluorine, and mercury.
Environmental Impact of Indoor Pollutant
1. Acid precipitation
2. Destruction of global nitrogen cycle
3. Ground level ozone
4. Deforestation
5. Diversion of agricultural residues
6. Loss of visibility, property or crops
Effect of Indoor Pollution on Health
1. Strong evidence: ARIs (acute respiratory infections), Chronic obstructive lung disease, Lung cancer
2. Moderate evidence: Cataract, TB (tuberculosis)
3. Limited evidence: Asthma
4. Insufficient evidence: Low birth weight and perinatal deaths, Heart disease etc
65
CHAPTER 4. ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT OF ENERGY SOURCES
Efforts to Reduce Indoor Air Pollutants
Three factors determine the extent to which Indoor Air Pollutants(IAP) impacts health:
• the degree of pollution, that is, the emission levels;
• the degree of exposure, that is, the amount of time spent in a polluted environment;
• personal susceptibility to the effects of IAP, that is, physiological factors that make some individuals more prone to the effects than others, such as children and asthmatics.
Technical interventions can thus reduce IAP in three ways (Ballard-Tremeer and Mathee, 2000):
• by producing less smoke: improved stoves, improved fuels and fuel switching;
• by removing smoke from the indoor environment: chimneys, flues, hoods and ventilation;
• by reducing exposure to smoke: reducing cooking time, behaviour, kitchen design.
   Others controlling measures can be housing design, behavioural changes like education, reducing smoke from stove, modified cooking practice.
4.1.2	Automotive Pollution
Exhaust gas or flue gas is emitted as a result of the combustion of fuels such as natural gas, gasoline/petrol, diesel fuel, fuel oil or coal. According to the type of engine, it is discharged into the atmosphere through an exhaust pipe. Motor vehicle emissions contribute to air pollution and are a major ingredient in the creation of smog in some large cities.
   The largest part of most combustion gas is nitrogen (N2), water vapor (H2O) (except with purecarbon fuels), and carbon dioxide (CO2) (except for fuels without carbon); these are not toxic or noxious (although carbon dioxide is a greenhouse gas that contributes to global warming). A relatively small part of combustion gas is undesirable noxious or toxic substances, such as carbon monoxide (CO) from incomplete combustion, hydrocarbons (properly indicated as CxHy, but typically shown simply as ”HC” on emissions-test slips) from unburnt fuel, nitrogen oxides (NOx) from excessive combustion temperatures, ozone (O3), and particulate matter (mostly soot).
Health Impacts
Carbon monoxide (CO) affects especially persons with heart disease, and fetuses. Unburned hydrocarbon (HC) has serious health effect on people who suffer from lung diseases, asthma or emphysema. Nitrogen oxides (NOx) is linked to a wide range of respiratory problems; cough, runny nose, and sore throat are among the most common. Ozone can cause chest pain, coughing, and shortness of breath. When inhaled, ozone can cause temporary decreases in lung function of 15 to over 20% in healthy adults. Lead exposure will lead to a decrease in intelligence quotient and can, in some cases, also lead to premature deaths. Particulate matter (PM) is associated with premature death, aggravation of respiratory and cardiovascular disease, and decrease in lung function.
4.2	Battery Hazards
Batteries are safe, but precaution applies when touching damaged cells and when handling lead acid systems that have access to lead and sulphuric acid. Several countries label lead acid as hazardous material, and rightly so. Let’s look at the hazards if not properly handled.
4.2.1	Explosion
A battery explosion is caused by misuse or malfunction, such as attempting to recharge a primary (nonrechargeable) battery, or a short circuit. Car batteries are most likely to explode when a short-circuit generates very large currents. Car batteries produce hydrogen, which is very explosive, when they are overcharged (because of electrolysis of the water in the electrolyte). When a battery is recharged at an excessive rate, an explosive gas mixture of hydrogen and oxygen may be produced faster than it can escape from within the battery, leading to pressure build-up and eventual bursting of the battery case. It may also cause damage to the charger or device.
	4.2. BATTERY HAZARDS	67
	4.2.2	Explosion
The sulphuric acid in a lead acid battery is highly corrosive and is potentially more harmful than acids used in other battery systems. Eye contact can cause permanent blindness; swallowing damages internal organs that can lead to death. First aid treatment calls for flushing the skin for 10 to 15 minutes with large amounts of water to cool the affected tissues and to prevent secondary damage. Immediately remove contaminated clothing and thoroughly wash the underlying skin. Always wear protective equipment when handling the sulphuric acid.
	4.2.3	Poisoning
Lead poisoning can leads to brain disease, slowed nerve conduction velocity [decreased reaction times], slow growth and development of child, effect in cognitive development like levels decrease in IO, cognitive function deficits such as verbal function / linguistic deficits. Others effects includes learning difficulties, hearing impairment; lack in auditory sensitivity , sight loss and impairment etc and problems in digestive system.
   Effects of cadmium includes accumulation on kidney (where it damages filtering mechanisms, dysfunction), lung impairment, bone disease, human carcinogenesis, diarrhoea, stomach pains and severe vomiting reproductive failure and possibly even infertility, damage to the central nervous system, damage to the immune system.
   Nickel-metal-hydride is considered non-toxic and the only concern is the electrolyte. Although toxic to plants, nickel is not harmful to humans. Lithium-ion is similarly benign the battery contains little toxic material. Nevertheless, caution is required when working with a damaged battery. When handling a spilled battery, do not touch your mouth, nose and eyes, and wash your hands thoroughly.
	4.2.4	Toxic Materials
Many types of batteries employ toxic materials such as lead, mercury, and cadmium as an electrode or electrolyte. When each battery reaches end of life it must be disposed of to prevent environmental damage. Battery are one form of electronic waste (e-waste).
	4.2.5	Safety Methods
1. Keep button batteries out of sight and reach of children. Remote controls, singing greeting cards, watches, hearing aids, thermometers, toys, electric keys and more may include these batteries.
2. Keep loose batteries locked away to prevent access by small children.
3. Share the danger of swallowing button batteries with caregivers, friends, family members and baby sitters.
4. If you suspect your child has ingested a battery, go to the hospital immediately. Wait for a medical assessment before allowing the child to eat and drink.
5. As a simple guideline, hydrogen sulphide which comes after over charging batteries , becomes harmful to human life if the odour is noticeable. Turn off the charger, vent the house and stay outside until the odour disappears.
	4.2.6	Recycling of Batteries
Lead acid batteries are usually composed of two plates: Pb alloy and PbO2 base. During the batteries discharge, PbSO4 is formed. The PbO2 base plate is essentially composed of a Pb alloy grate in which a PbO2 paste is impregnated. The grates are normally composed of alloys containing low amounts of Ca, Sb and Sn. The electrolyte used is a sulphuric acid solution. A polypropylene box typically contains the electrolyte and a group of six cells.
The recycling sequential steps normally are:
1. the separation of the plastic case
2. acid removal
3. separation of the plastic, metallic lead and paste
4. separation, reduction, refining and casting
                           CHAPTER 4. ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT OF ENERGY SOURCES
4.3	Nuclear Hazard
A number of nuclear explosions have already been made during recent past in different part of world. Irrespective of judgements about the ethics of this practice, these tests occurred, injecting substantial amounts of radioactivity into the environment. Nuclear explosions are very rapid and based on a rough estimate, in an explosion about 50 per cent of the energy goes to the blast, 33 per cent as heat and the rest 17 per cent or so to radioactivity.
   The radioactive dust that falls to the earth after atomic explosion is called radioactive fallout. The estimated percept dose to world population from fallout of past nuclear explosions is 10 microsievert per year.
4.3.1	Biological Effect of Radioactive Radiation
Radioactive substances are among the most toxic substances known. Radium is 25,000 times more lethal than arsenic. The cell, which is the fundamental unit of life, is the primary site of radiation damage. If too many cells are damaged, the symptoms show up in the growing tissues as in the case of loss of hair, ulceration of the mouth, the reddening and haemorrhaging of the skin and lowering of the blood count. If these symptoms grow more severe, death will result.
Somatic Effects
These are the direct results of action of radiation on the body cell and tissues. These effects may be immediate or delayed. The illness to become a victim are-cardiovascular disorder, cataract, leukaemia, sterility, premature ageing and shortenings of life span. All these are somatic effects.
Genetic Effects
There is another more serious type of effect of ionizing radiations, known as genetic effect. This arises from the damage to the sex cells. If a sex cell is damaged and if that sex cell is one of the pair that goes into the production of a fertilized ovum, it will give rise to an offspring with various kinds of major or minor physical defects.
Radioactive Waste
There is no way of destroying radioactivity. The radioactive waste from nuclear plants may be in form of gases, liquids or solids. There is no suitable and cheap method of storing the radioactive waste. At any time, radioactivity is likely to escape from the waste in water bodies, concrete cases and salt formations in high mountains. The nuclear waste is thus likely to get leached into the biosphere. Among the long-lived fission products the most hazardous are Strontium-90 (half life 28.9y) and caesium- 137 (half life 30.2y).
   The highly toxic alpha-active element plutonium (half life 24,100y) is another reactor product that has to be taken care of. All these elements enter the human system and get deposited in various parts of the body causing cell damage. Radionuclides have become distributed throughout the environment and are transmitted to man via the food chain. When taken in by man, some radio nuclides become concentrated in specific organs where they become injurious to health.
