Chapter 5
Energy Storage
The way energy is stored depends primarily on the source of energy. According to the latter, we know the following methods of energy storage:
1. Chemical energy storage: Chemical energy is a form of potential energy, storage of which further depends on its source. We know the following methods or mediums for chemical energy storage:
(a) Hydrogen. Although the colourless, odourless, tasteless and non-toxic gas has potentials as a source of energy, it is primarily used as an energy storage medium for subsequent use. Examples include underground hydrogen storage involving the use of underground caverns and empty gas and oil fields to store grid energy for intermittent energy resources such as wind power and solar energy for instance.
(b) Biofuels and biomass. They do not refer to energy storage as such but are rather examples of chemical energy storage. When wood logs or biofuels are burned, they release energy that is stored in the bonds of molecules and atoms.
(c) Liquid nitrogen. Just like hydrogen, liquid nitrogen shows potentials as a source of energy but instead, it is used as a form of energy storage. It can be used to generate electricity or refrigeration and cooling.
(d) Oxy-hydrogen. It is a mixture of oxygen and hydrogen which when ignited, releases high pressure and high temperature steam that can be used to generate electricity.
(e) Other. There are many other mediums to store chemical energy. Examples include: hydrogen peroxide; it is best known for its uses as bleach and cleaning agent although it is also used as rocket fuel and vanadium pentoxide; it is used in vanadium redox batteries, a type of flow batteries that are used to store various forms of chemical energy including electric power produced by wind farms
2. Electrochemical energy storage. It involves the use of various devices which convert chemical energy into electricity. Examples include: Battery. It is a widely used device that converts stored chemical energy into electricity. Two basic types of batteries exist which known as the primary batteries or non-rechargeable batteries and secondary batteries which can be recharged and used multiple times.
Fuel cell. It refers to a device which converts chemical energy into electricity through chemical reaction. Several different types of fuel cells exist but all feature a cathode, anode and an electrolyte.
3. Electrical energy storage. It involves the use of an electric field to store energy. Examples include: Capacitor and supercapacitor (double-layer capacitor). Both are electrical components that are used to store electric charge but as its name reveals, supercapacitor can store more electric charge. Capacitor is typically used a a short-term backup power, while supercapacitor can also be used to power large engines including vehicles. But it is also often used to run low-power devices such as portable media players, PC Cards, etc..
Superconducting magnetic energy storage (SMES). It refers to a relatively new technology which stores electricity from the grid within a magnetic field that is created by the flow of current in a coil.
69

4. Thermal energy storage. It refers to methods that are used to store thermal energy in order to use it to cool or heat buildings when the temperature inside is above or below the internal energy in the stored substance.
(a) Hot water storage tank. It refers to a water tank that stores hot water for space heating, washing, bathing, etc.. Hot water storage tanks are a common feature of wood furnaces and solar thermal collectors.
(b) Storage heater. It is an electric heater that stores energy during the evening or night and releases heat during the day when the price of base load electricity is higher. Storage heaters work by accumulating heat in ceramic material or clay bricks.
(c) Steam accumulator. It refers to a steel tank that contains steam under pressure. It is used to balance between supply and demand by accepting steam when the supply is greater than demand and to release it when demand exceeds the supply.
5. Mechanical energy storage. Methods to store energy that is produced by motion include:
(a) Hydraulic accumulator. It is a storage reservoir which stores non-compressible fluid under pressure. There are several types of hydraulic accumulators but the most widely used is the so-called compressed gas accumulator which contains gas under pressure, usually nitrogen.
(b) Flywheel energy storage. Like its name suggests, it is a method to store energy through a flywheel. This type of mechanical energy storage is used to store grid energy and energy that is generated by wind farms but it also shows potentials in transportation and as an emergency power source.
5.1	Hybrid Vehicles
A hybrid vehicle is a vehicle that uses two or more distinct power sources to move the vehicle. The term most commonly refers to hybrid electric vehicles (HEVs), which combine an internal combustion engine and one or more electric motors. However, other mechanisms to capture and use energy may also be included.
Figure 5.1.1: Hybrid vehicle having two source, petroleum and electricity.
   Different power sources like coal, wood, LPG, hydrogen, petrol, solar, wind, human powered can be used.
   Hybrid-electric vehicles (HEVs) combine the benefits of gasoline engines and electric motors and can be configured to obtain different objectives, such as improved fuel economy, increased power, or additional auxiliary power for electronic devices and power tools.
Some of the advanced technologies typically used by hybrids include
1. Regenerative Braking. The electric motor applies resistance to the drivetrain causing the wheels to slow down. In return, the energy from the wheels turns the motor, which functions as a generator, converting energy normally wasted during coasting and braking into electricity, which is stored in a battery until needed by the electric motor.
5.1. HYBRID VEHICLES

	(a) Series hybrid vehicles.	(b) Parallel hybrid vehicles.
2. Electric Motor Drive/Assist. The electric motor provides additional power to assist the engine in accelerating, passing, or hill climbing. This allows a smaller, more efficient engine to be used. In some vehicles, the motor alone provides power for low-speed driving conditions where internal combustion engines are least efficient.
3. Automatic Start/Shutoff. Automatically shuts off the engine when the vehicle comes to a stop and restarts it when the accelerator is pressed. This prevents wasted energy from idling.
	5.1.1	Types
Series Hybrid
Vehicle propulsion is by a electric motor only, Internal Combustion Engine(ICE) is used for charging the HV battery.
Parallel Hybrid
Uses multiple propulsion energy sources, this means the electric motor and ICE propels the vehicle.
Series-parallel Hybrid
These vehicles can operate using the electric motor alone or with assist of the ICE, they combine both functions of series and parallel design.
	5.1.2	Advantages and Disadvantages
Here are few of the top advantages of having a hybrid vehicles :
1. Environmentally Friendly: One of the biggest advantage of hybrid vehicle over gasoline powered car is that it runs cleaner and has better gas mileage which makes it environmentally friendly. A hybrid vehicle runs on twin powered engine (gasoline engine and electric motor) that cuts fuel consumption and conserves energy.
2. Financial Benefits: Hybrid cars are supported by many credits and incentives that help to make them affordable. Lower annual tax bills and exemption from congestion charges comes in the form of less amount of money spent on the fuel.
3. Less Dependance on Fossil Fuels: A Hybrid vehicles are much cleaner and requires less fuel to run which means less emissions and less dependance on fossil fuels. This in turn also helps to reduce the price of oil in domestic market.
4. Regenerative Braking System: Each time you apply brake while driving a hybrid vehicle helps you to recharge your battery a little. An internal mechanism kicks in that captures the energy released and uses it to charge the battery which in turn eliminates the amount of time and need for stopping to recharge the battery periodically.
5. Built From Light Materials: Hybrid vehicles are made up of lighter materials which means less energy is required to run. The engine is also smaller and lighter which also saves much energy.
6. Higher Resale Value: With continuous increase in price of gasoline, more and more people are turning towards hybrid cars. The result is that these green vehicles have started commanding higher than average resale values. So, in case you are not satisfied with your vehicle, you can always sell it at a premium price to buyers looking for it.
   There disadvantages to owning a hybrid vehicles, but they are probably not what you think. Contrary to popular myth, hybrid vehicles have just as much power as regular vehicles and have no issue with mountain driving or towing. The disadvantages will depend on the type of hybrid fuel that your vehicles uses.
Here are few of the disadvantages of a hybrid vehicles:
1. Less Power: Hybrid vehicles are twin powered engine. The gasoline engine which is primary source of power is much smaller as compared to what you get in single engine powered car and electric motor is low power. The combined power of both is often less than that of gas powered engine. It is therefore suited for city driving and not for speed and acceleration.
2. Can be Expensive: The biggest drawback of having a hybrid vehicles is that it can burn a hole in your pocket. Hybrid cars are comparatively expensive than a regular petrol car and can cost $5000 to $10000 more than a standard version. However, that extra amount can be offset with lower running cost and tax exemptions.
3. Poorer Handling: A hybrid vehicles houses an gasoline powered engine, a lighter electric engine and a pack of powerful batteries. This adds weight and eats up the extra space in the car. Extra weight results in fuel inefficiency and manufacturers cut down weight which has resulted in motor and battery downsizing and less support in the suspension and body.
4. Higher Maintenance Costs: The presence of dual engine, continuous improvement in technology, and higher maintenance cost can make it difficult for mechanics to repair the car. It is also difficult to find a mechanic with such an expertise.
5. Presence of High Voltage in Batteries: In case of an accident, the high voltage present inside the batteries can prove lethal for you. There is a high chance of you getting electrocuted in such cases which can also make the task difficult for rescuers to get other passengers and driver out of the vehicles.
5.2	Smart Grid Systems
A smart grid is an electricity distribution network that can monitor electricity flowing within itself and, based on this self awareness, adjust to changing conditions. It does this by automatically reconfiguring the network and/or exerting a level of control over connected demand and generation.

   A Smart Grid is a modern electricity system. It uses sensors, monitoring, communications, automation, and computers to improve the flexibility, security, reliability, efficiency, and safety of the electricity system.
   Smart Grid generally refers to a class of technology people are using to bring utility electricity delivery systems into the 21st century, using computer-based remote control and automation.
   These systems are made possible by two way communication technology and computer processing that has been used for decades in other industries. They are beginning to be used on electricity networks, from the power plants and wind farms all the way to the consumers of electricity in homes and businesses. They offer many benefits to utilities and consumers mostly seen in big improvements in energy efficiency on the electricity grid and in the energy users homes and offices.
   The present revolution in communication systems and internet offers the possibility of much greater monitoring and control throughout the power system and hence more effective, flexible and lower cost operation. Smart Grid is an opportunity to use new ICTs (Information and Communication Technologies) to revolutionise the electrical power system.
   It enables demand response and demand side management through the integration of smart meters, smart appliances and consumer loads, microgeneration, and electricity storage including (electric vehicles) and by providing customers with information related to energy use and prices. Customers will be provided with information and incentives to modify their consumption pattern to overcome some of the constraints in the power system
It accommodates and facilitates all renewable
the environmental impact.
   It assures and improves reliability and the security of supply by being resilient to disturbances, attacks and natural disasters, anticipating and responding to system disturbances (predictive maintenance and self-healing), and strengthening the security of supply through enhanced transfer capabilities.
   It maintains the power quality of the electricity supply to cater for sensitive equipment that increases with the digital economy. It opens access to the markets through increased transmission paths, aggregated supply and demand response initiatives and ancillary service provisions.
5.3	Batteries
An electric battery is a device consisting of one or more electrochemical cells that convert stored chemical energy into electrical energy. Each cell contains a positive terminal, or cathode, and a negative terminal, or anode. Electrolytes allow ions to move between the electrodes and terminals, which allows current to flow out of the battery to perform work.
   Primary (single-use or ”disposable”) batteries are used once and discarded; the electrode materials are irreversibly changed during discharge. Common examples are the alkaline battery used for flashlights and a multitude of portable devices. Secondary (rechargeable batteries) can be discharged and recharged multiple times; the original composition of the electrodes can be restored by reverse current.
   Batteries have much lower specific energy (energy per unit mass) than common fuels such as gasoline. This is somewhat offset by the higher efficiency of electric motors in producing mechanical work, compared to combustion engines.
5.3.1	Principle of Operation
Batteries convert chemical energy directly to electrical energy. A battery consists of some number of voltaic cells. Each cell consists of two half-cells connected in series by a conductive electrolyte containing anions and cations. One half-cell includes electrolyte and the negative electrode, the electrode to which anions (negatively charged ions) migrate; the other half-cell includes electrolyte and the positive electrode to which cations (positively charged ions) migrate.
   Redox reactions power the battery. Cations are reduced (electrons are added) at the cathode during charging, while anions are oxidized (electrons are removed) at the anode during discharge. The electrodes do not touch each other, but are electrically connected by the electrolyte. Some cells use different electrolytes for each half-cell. A separator allows ions to flow between half-cells, but prevents mixing of the electrolytes.
   The voltage developed across a cell’s terminals depends on the energy release of the chemical reactions of its electrodes and electrolyte. If a charger cannot detect when the battery is fully charged then overcharging is likely, damaging it.
   Disposable batteries typically lose 8 to 20 percent of their original charge per year when stored at room temperature (2030?C). This is known as the ”self-discharge” rate.
   Battery life can be extended by storing the batteries at a low temperature, as in a refrigerator or freezer, which slows the side reactions. Such storage can extend the life of alkaline batteries by about 5%; rechargeable batteries can hold their charge much longer, depending upon type.
5.3.2	C Rate
The C-rate is a measure of the rate at which a battery is being discharged. It is defined as the discharge current divided by the theoretical current draw under which the battery would deliver its nominal rated capacity in one hour. A 1C discharge rate would deliver the battery’s rated capacity in 1 hour. A 2C discharge rate means it will discharge twice as fast (30 minutes). A 1C discharge rate on a 1.6 Ah battery means a discharge current of 1.6 A. A 2C rate would mean a discharge current of 3.2 A.
5.3.3	Lead Acid Batteries
They are oldest types of batteries, invented in 1859. It consists of lead plates of lead and lead oxide in presence of electrolyte(Approx. 35% sulfuric acid and 65% water. The cathode is made of metallic lead, and the anode of lead dioxide. Each lead-acid ”cell” produces 2.14 volts. As the battery discharges, the electrolyte reacts with the plates, changing their surface to lead sulphate.
	Pb(s) + PbO2(s) + H2SO4(aq) = 2PbSO4(s) + 2H2O(l)	(5.1)
   The lead sulphate product clings to the electrodes, so applied external voltage can reverse the reaction. When the battery is recharged, the lead sulphate reforms back into lead and lead oxide, and the specific gravity of the electrolyte is restored. Over time, the lead sulphate converts to a crystalline form that no longer dissolves on recharging. This process is accelerated if the battery is left in a discharged condition. Sulphation can be avoided if the battery is fully recharged immediately after a discharge cycle. Excessive charging electrolyses some of the water, producing hydrogen and oxygen (called ”gassing”) which mixture is highly explosive.
5.3.4	Types
1. Flooded (Wet Cells): Electrolyte is a liquid, battery is usually not sealed and not spill-proof and usually vent hydrogen gas during charging.
2. Valve-Regulated Lead-Acid (VRLA): They are of following types:
(a) Gelled Electrolyte (Gel Cell): Electrolyte is immobilized by a thickening agent.
(b) Absorbed Glass Mat (AGM): Electrolyte is absorbed in separators of matted glass fibers.
VRLA batteries are hermetically sealed and designed to produce little or no hydrogen gas during charging.
5.3.5	Battery Service Types
The three service types are Starting, Deep Cycle, and Marine:
1. Starting: Sometimes called SLI, for starting, lighting, ignition. They are typically available for automobile battery and are designed to produce very large starting current for a very short time. Such battery may last for thousands of cycles in normal starting use (2% - 5% discharge). Automotive batteries will generally fail after 30 150 deep cycles. The plates are composed of a lead ”sponge” and they have very large surface area, but is quickly consumed if the battery is deep-cycled.
2. Deep Cycle: They are designed to be discharged as much as 80% of full capacity many times. They have maximum life if average discharge is kept at about 50%. The plates are usually solid lead, not sponge and have less surface area, hence less ”instant power like starting batteries provide. It will not hurt a deep cycle battery to be used as a starting battery, but cannot supply as much cranking amps.
3. Marine: They are hybrid type batteries and they have characteristics between starting and deepcycle batteries.
5.3.6	Nickel Batteries
Technical Summary
There are a number of Nickel based batteries currently available or under development, including NickelCadmium (Ni-Cd), Nickel-Metal Hydride (Ni-MH), Nickel-Zinc (Ni-Zn) and Sodium-Nickel Chloride (NaNiCl2). Ni-Cd and Ni-MH are the most developed of the Ni batteries.
Energy Density and Discharge Time
These various Ni battery types cover the energy density range 20 120 Wh/kg (Dahlen, 2003). The lifetime of batteries is determined by the number of charge/discharge cycles that they can perform. Ni-Cd and Ni-MH batteries perform among the highest number of deep cycles relative to other battery technologies, typically up to around 1500 deep cycles. Ni-Zn and Na?NiCl2 have a shorter lifetime. Ni-Cd batteries also have a strong memory effect, where as in Ni-MH batteries the effect is much less significant.
Energy Efficiency
Ni-Cd and Ni-MH batteries are the most developed of the Nickel batteries. However, they also offer the lowest efficiency, discharging around 70 % of the energy used during charging, although Ni-Cd batteries have a lower self-discharge rate than Ni-MH. In comparison, NiZn batteries offer efficiencies of 80% and Na ? NiCl2 batteries have an efficiency of around 90%.
Development/Deployment status
Ni-Cd batteries have been produced since the early 20th century and formed the majority of the rechargeable battery market in consumer electronics by the 1990s. The first consumer Ni-MH batteries appeared in the 1980s and have replaced Ni-Cd in many rechargeable battery applications. Despite being used widely in electric vehicles, there are few examples of their application to electricity markets.
Applications
The Golden Valley Electric Association (GVEA) in Fairbanks, Alaska installed a large scale Ni-Cd Battery Energy Storage System (BESS) to provide 27 MW of electricity for a minimum of 15 minutes to stabilise the local power grid in the event of sudden loss of generation. The BESS was designed and built by Saft, an international battery manufacturer, and comprises 13,760 Saft SBH 920 high-performance rechargeable Ni-Cd cells arranged in four parallel strings. The system provides a nominal voltage of 5,000 V and a storage capacity of 3,680 Ah. At the time, the BESS was awarded the Guinness World Record for ”the world’s most powerful battery” by delivering 46 MW for 5 minutes.
Economics
Both Ni-Cd and Ni-MH batteries are expensive to manufacture relative to other battery technologies, possibly twice the cost of Lithium batteries and potentially four times the cost of lead acid batteries. The GVEA BESS discussed above was developed in 2005 at a cost of US$ 30-million.
Environmental Impacts and Regulatory Issues
The most significant drawback of Ni-Cd batteries is the highly toxic cadmium used within them. Although this metal is highly recyclable it is exceedingly toxic. Most Nickel is recovered from end-of-life batteries since the metal is reasonably easy to retrieve from scrap and can be used in corrosion resistant alloys such as stainless steel. EU legislation is in part responsible for the supercedence of Ni-Cd batteries by Ni-MH batteries and represents a significant issue to any future development of Ni-Cd battery technologies.
5.3.7	Lithium Batteries
Technical summary
In common with other advanced battery systems, Lithium batteries are electrochemical cells. Lithium-Ion (Li-ion) and Lithium-Polymer (Lipol) types are both available.
Energy Density and Discharge Time
Li-ion and Li-pol batteries offer high charge densities of 100 150 Wh/kg (INVESTIRE, 2003). Nano composite electrode systems may offer even higher energy densities.
Energy Efficiency
Charge/discharge efficiencies of 90 100% are reported for Lithium batteries.
Development/Deployment status
Li-ion batteries have taken over 50% of the small portable market in the last few years, however there are some challenges for making large-scale Li-ion batteries. Under the EU 6th Framework Programme a consortium of European organisations is investigating advanced lithium energy storage systems based on the use of nano-powders and nano-composite electrodes/electrolytes. According to a 2004 report from the Taiwanese Industrial Technology and Research Institute (ITRI, 2004) their nano composite electrode technologies can provide energy densities of greater than 200 Wh/kg.
Economics
According to the Energy Storage Association (ESA, 2007) the main hurdle associated with mass energy storage systems using Li batteries is the high cost (above 420/kWh) due to special packaging and internal overcharge protection circuits. Several companies are working to reduce the manufacturing cost of Li-ion batteries to capture large energy markets (multi-kW, kWh sizes for residential and commercial markets). The automotive industry is one of the main drivers behind this development.
Environmental Impacts and Regulatory Issues
Li batteries have a limited environmental impact since the lithium oxides and salts can be recycled.
5.3.8	Lead-Acid Batteries
Technical summary
In common with other advanced battery systems, Lead-Acid batteries are electrochemical cells, in this case based upon chemical reactions involving lead and sulphuric acid. Lead-Acid is one of the oldest and most developed battery technologies.
Energy Density and Discharge Time
Because of the high density of the materials used in these batteries, the typical energy densities are lower than other batteries at 25 45 Wh/kg.
Energy Efficiency
Charge/discharge efficiencies for lead-acid batteries are 60 95% with self-discharge rates of 2 to 5% per month (Lailler , 2003).
Development/deployment status
In stationary storage applications, energy density is typically of less importance and lead acid battery energy storage systems have traditionally dominated this market, partly due to their low cost.
Economics
Lead acid batteries are low cost compared to other battery technologies, being as much as 8 times less expensive than Li batteries and up to 13 times less than Ni batteries. The cost in 1995 prices of the BEWAG and Vernon installations discussed above were 707 and 305$/kWh respectively.
Environmental Impacts and Regulatory Issues
The lead used in these batteries is toxic and therefore must be recycled. In addition, the sulphuric acid typically used as the electolyte is corrosive and when overcharged the battery generates hydrogen which presents an explosion risk. Under Directive 2006/66/EC, a minimum recycling rate of 65% by average weight of lead acid batteries must be reached in EU Member States by September 2011.
5.3.9	Flow Batteries
Technical summary
Flow batteries store and release energy through a reversible electro-chemical reaction between two electrolytes. There are four types of flow battery currently being produced or in the late stages of development; zinc bromine, vanadium redox (VRB), polysulphide bromide and cerium zinc. The zinc-bromine system - developed by ZBB Energy Corp in the USA -represents a type of hybrid flow battery. A leading form of the vanadium redox flow battery is a system by VRB Power Systems Inc in Canada.
   These systems feature the separation of chemical reactants from the electrochemical cells through which charging and discharging take place. The storage capacity is dependent upon the size of the electrolyte tanks whilst the power output is dependent upon the size of the fuel cell. The vanadium redox system has an advantage over the hybrid system as the discharge time at full power can be varied.
Energy Density and Discharge Time
VRBs can be fully discharged without reducing life expectancy. A VRB in Sapporo, Japan has undergone around 14,000 discharge cycles, this gives it a competitive advantage over many other storage technologies.
Energy Efficiency
These systems have quoted efficiencies varying from 70% (cerium zinc) to 85%.
Development/Deployment status
The VRB system is currently being deployed at a number of wind farms around the world. A case study of Sorne Wind Farm in Ireland is given below. The ZBB system has been undergoing testing at the DUIT facility in the US at a 500 kWh scale, with plans to link four to make a 2 MWh battery. A report on US energy storage (UK DTI, 2006) commented that the ZBB system was the noisiest system observed and the presence of multiple pumping circuits also indicates that regular maintenance activity will be required. Whilst these technology examples are in the early stages of development it would appear that the Vanadium battery is currently the lead technology.
Economics
The overall cost of a 2MWh ZBB system would be in the region of 1.8 million. The cost of the VRB system illustrated in Case Study 1 was just over 6 million for a 2MW, 12 MWh system.
Environmental Impacts and Regulatory Issues
The potential size and scale of these systems are likely to determine the extent to which environmental impacts are significant. Significant quantities of space may be required for holding tanks containing the electrolytes and although these substances may not be specifically toxic this obviously requires care at the design stage. A major advantage of the technology is the ability of the technology to perform discharge cycles indefinitely so there are no significant waste products associated with operation.
5.3.10	Metal-Air Batteries
Technical summary
In common with other advanced battery systems, metal-air batteries are electrochemical cells. Metal-air batteries are the most compact batteries available according to the Energy Storage Association (ESA, 2007).
Energy Density and Discharge Time
Energy densities for metal air batteries can be high covering the range 110 to 420 Wh/kg
Energy Efficiency
The most significant disadvantage of metal-air batteries is the inefficient electrical recharging leading to a typical charge/discharge efficiency of around 50%.
Development/Deployment status
Of all the metal-air systems developed to date the zinc-air battery is the most advanced despite the fact that other metal electrodes have a higher theoretical energy density. The deployment of metal-air batteries is limited to small-scale applications such as hearing aids or systems in which the fuel cells are mechanically refuelled. The electrical recharge-ability of these batteries needs to be improved to enable competition with other rechargeable battery technologies.
Economics
The capital costs of metal-air batteries are quoted as one of the least expensive (ESA, 2007) but this cost must be treated with caution since these batteries are very difficult and inefficient to re-charge.
Environmental Impacts and Regulatory Issues
Environmentally, metal-air batteries are relatively inert since no toxic materials are involved in their construction. In common with other battery types, metals such as zinc or aluminium used within the battery should be recycled.
5.3.11	Sodium-Sulphur Batteries(NaS)
Technical summary
In common with other advanced battery systems, Sodium-Sulphur (NaS) batteries are electrochemical cells. NaS batteries are the most developed type of high temperature battery. A NaS battery consists of liquid (molten) sulphur at the positive electrode and liquid (molten) sodium at the negative electrode as active materials separated by a solid beta alumina ceramic electrolyte. The electrolyte allows only the positive sodium ions to pass through itand combine with the sulphur to form sodium poly-sulphides.
Energy Density and Discharge Time
NaS batteries have a relatively high energy density, within the range 150 240 Wh/kg (DTI, 2004). NaS has significant potential to become a cost-effective, modular, and portable bulk storage medium as it is specifically designed for long discharge cycles (8 hours), but has the capacity to discharge very rapidly and at multiples of rated power

5.4. SUPER CAPACITORS
Energy Efficiency
These batteries have an estimated lifetime of 15 years with a cycle life of 2500 4500 and charge/discharge efficiencies up to 90%.
Development/deployment status
Research and development into NaS batteries has been pioneered in Japan since 1983 by the Tokyo Electric Power Corporation (TEPCO) and NGK. As of 2004 there were 59 NaS energy storage systems with capacities rated greater than 500 kW (Mears, 2005). In total more than 100 MW of NaS energy storage capacity has been installed, mostly in Japan where this energy storage technology is a commercial reality.
Economics
AEP anticipate the combined cost for the three installations ordered in 2007, including site preparation, equipment and control systems, will be around $27 million (18.9 million). A study of the 2002 NaS demonstration project carried out for the US Department ofEnergy energy storage program calculated a potential 9.8% rate of return on investment in the system and suggested the present value of power quality benefits were over three times the present value of peak shaving benefits (Norris B et al., 2007).
Environmental Impacts and Regulatory Issues
There are limited environmental concerns associated with NaS batteries, since the materials used in their construction are relatively environmentally inert. There is a small risk associated with the high temperature at which the battery must be operated in order to maintain the sulphur in its molten form.
5.4	Super Capacitors
A supercapacitor (SC), sometimes ultracapacitor, formerly electric double-layer capacitor (EDLC)) is a high-capacity electrochemical capacitor with capacitance values up to 10,000 farads at 1.2 volt that bridge the gap between electrolytic capacitors and rechargeable batteries. They typically store 10 to 100 times more energy per unit volume or mass than electrolytic capacitors, can accept and deliver charge much faster than batteries, and tolerate many more charge and discharge cycles than rechargeable batteries. They are however 10 times larger than conventional batteries for a given charge.
   The amount of energy a capacitor is capable of storing can be increased by either increasing the capacitance or the voltage stored on the capacitor. The stored voltage is limited by the voltage withstand strength of the dielectric. As with batteries, the turn around efficiency when charging/discharging capacitors is also an important consideration, as is response time. The effective series resistance of the capacitor has a significant impact on both. The total voltage change when charging or discharging capacitors is shown in equation.
(5.2)
(5.3)
(5.4)
(5.5)
   The supercapacitor(rated in Farads), also known as ultracapacitor differs from a regular capacitor in that it has a very high capacitance. A capacitor stores energy by means of a static charge as opposed to an electrochemical reaction. Applying a voltage differential on the positive and negative plates charges the capacitor.
   The supercapacitor is ideal for energy storage that undergoes frequent charge and discharge cycles at high current and short duration. Supercapacitors or double-layer capacitors (DLCs) as they are also known, contain a significantly enlarged electrode surface area compared to conventional capacitors. Supercapacitors are capable of very fast charging and discharging times, and are able to go through many cycles without degradation. Typical efficiencies for supercapacitors are high (85 98%) making them an attractive storage technology for many applications, however currently these are mostly small-scale.
2