Chapter 2
Energy Basics
	2.1	Energy
Energy is defined as ability or Capacity to do work. Work has a very broader meaning to Scientist and Engineers. Non-technical people can think energy as the ability of doing diverse things in life. Energy is not a thing or substance but idea or a theoretical concept to connect diverse process like, Burning Fuels , Propelling machines, Charging Batteries. Although appearing different ,they have a number of common feature and describing these features leads to greater understanding of energy. Energy has many forms and can be converted from one to another.
• Kinetic Energy: Energy possessed by moving object E.g. Wind ,Water in Streams. Speed and mass of object influence in amount of total kinetic energy. Faster the wind or more the flowing water more the energy.
• Potential Energy: Energy Possessed by object’s position relative to earth, This energy will be converted to kinetic energy, if the object fall for example, water behind the dam.
• Thermal Energy (heat): A form of kinetic energy due to random motion of the atoms or molecules of solid gases or liquid. Faster the atoms or molecules move, greater will be the thermal energy of the object.
• Chemical Energy: A form of energy stored in atoms or molecules Usually chemical energy is converted to heat (combustion ) or electrical energy (batteries).
• Electrical Energy: It is one of the most familiar form. The Organized flow of electrons in a material can be considered as electrical energy.
• Electromagnetic Energy(radiation): This is form of electrical and magnetic energy which all objects ,in different amounts radiate or emit. The most familiar form is light.
• Mechanical Energy: Energy of rotation usually associated with rotating shaft.
   In an energy conversion process two things are important: Quantities of energy involved and Rate at which energy is converted . Rate per second at which energy is converted is called the power. Mathematically,
Energy = power × time
   There are many ways of measuring the energy. Joule (abbreviated as J) is the Standard Unit or SI unit of Energy
Calories also common unit
British Thermal Unit (BTU) Particularly used when talking about steam
Tonnes of Coal Equivalent (TCE)
Tonnes of Oil Equivalent (TOE)
11

1Calorie = 4.182J
1BTU = 1055J
1TCE = 29.31GJ
1TOE = 41.868GJ
(2.1)
   Power is mainly measured in watts (abbreviated as W) . 1 watt is defined as power produced when converting 1 joule of energy per second. For the case involving large amount Kilo, Mega, Giga prefixes are used.
1KW=1000W and 1MW=106W
Form of energy can also be indicated in the output from a particular piece of equipment. When one form
Figure 2.1.1: Effect of intermediate process while calculating efficiency.
of energy is converted into other for a particular purpose, not all the energy is converted, certain energy is wasted or lost to the process. The ratio of Useful energy to Energy Input is the efficiency.
   The Process of energy conversion generally comprises of number of intermediate transformations or stages with their own conversion efficiency Overall system efficiency is found by multiplication of efficiencies of each stage. As the number of stages increases the overall system efficiency decreases.
Overall system Efficiency = 30% × 80% × 80% × 60% = 12%
   One way to increase the efficiency is to use the wastage energy (espheat) The heat energy from exhaust gases from boiler can be used via heat exchanger. E.g. in agro-processing factory this heat energy can be used for drying the product co-generation or combined heat and power (CHP) uses this idea. E.g. In a sugar industry: The bagasse or sugarcane fibres are used as fuel for generating electricity using a turbine. Heat remaining in the exhaust gas is used to evaporate water from raw cane juice which is the part of extraction process. The overall efficiency of the Co-generation system can be 80% or higher.
   The energy conversion from original source to the useful form generally take place in number of stages. The energy flows from one to other form at each conversion ,transformation or transport step. These steps can be considered as a chain and the energy in this chain can be classified into:
1. Primary Energy: Energy in the form available in natural environment
2. Secondary Energy: Energy Ready for transport or transmission
3. Final Energy: Energy the consumer buys or receives.
4. Useful energy: Energy actually required to perform the work.
2.2	Classification of Energy Sources
1. Biomass Energy: Any material of plant or animal origin such as biomass, agricultutal residue, animal and human faeces. They can be converted to solid, liquid or gaseous fuel through various processes but they needs some processing stage such as chopping, mixing, drying etc. before conversion.
2. Solar Energy: Energy from the sun as either direct or diffuse radiation. Direct radiation is collected when collector (leaf or solar panel) faces the sun. Diffuse radiation comes from every direction and is present even on cloudy day. Solar Energy is converted to heat through thermal solar devices and to electricity through photovoltaic cells.
	2.2. CLASSIFICATION OF ENERGY SOURCES	13

Figure 2.2.1: Classification of energy resources.
3. Hydro Energy: The potential energy from the water stored behind dams, weirs or water falls. The kinetic energy of streams or rivers Water wheels and hydro turbines are used to convert the energy to mechanical or electrical energy.
4. Wind Energy: The Kinetic energy from the wind is converted by wind turbines into mechanical energy or electrical energy.
5. Geothermal Energy: Heat energy flowing from the earth’s core to surface by molten rocks or hot water. This heat energy can be used for spacing heating, drying or electricity generation.
6. Animate Energy: Energy delivered by humans and animals. Major source of energy in agriculture in developing countries but they never appear in national energy balances.
7. Ocean Energy: Includes Wave Energy and Ocean Thermal Energy (heat flow between the warm surface and cool deep water)
8. Fossil Fuels: Coal, Crude Oil and natural gas are sources of energy.
9. Nuclear Energy: Energy released when nuclei of atoms break apart This huge energy is utilized by converting to electrical energy.
Energy Sources are sometimes classified under heading as:
1. Renewable: Source of energy not depleted by use such as wind energy, solar energy are renewable sources of energy. Biomass can be renewable if regrow this matched by consumption. New and Renewable covers all renewable energy plus geothermal and ocean energy.
2. Traditional and Non-Traditional Energy: It depends on the users perspective. Many biomass users would be regarded as traditional and fossil fuel as non-Traditional. Wood can be considered as traditional but when used in a gasifier if it produces non traditional source.
3. Modern:
4. Commercial: Refers to those energy for which have to be paid for example fossil fuels, biomass is usually classified as non-commercial but it depends where we are in the world.
5. Conventional
2.3	Importance of Energy in achieving Maslow’s hierarchy of Needs
2.3.1	Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs or Theory of Human Needs
There is hierarchy of needs. People satisfy the most pressing need first. The needs are:
Physiological Needs
The survival needs for food, water, shelter etc. Man who is missing everything in life in an extreme fashion, the major motivation would be the physiological needs. A person who is lacking food, safety, love, and esteem would most probably hunger for food more strongly than for anything else. If all the needs are unsatisfied, and the organism is then dominated by the physiological needs.
Safety Needs
Needs that protects from physical harm and economic deprivation. If the physiological needs are fulfilled, there then emerges a new set of needs, which we may categorize roughly as the safety needs. Again, as in hungry man, we find that the dominating goal is a strong determinant not only of his current world-outlook and philosophy but also of his philosophy of the future. Practically everything looks less important than safety (even sometimes the physiological needs which being satisfied, are now underestimated).
Social Needs
These needs are sense of belongingness, friendship, affection, love etc. If both the physiological and the safety needs are fairly well gratified, then there will emerge the love and affection and belongingness needs repeat itself with this new centre. Now the person will feel keenly, as never before, the absence of friends, or a sweetheart, or a wife, or children. He will hunger for affectionate relations with people in general, namely, for a place in his group, and he will strive with great intensity to achieve this goal. He will want to attain such a place more than anything else in the world and may even forget that once, when he was hungry, he sneered at love.
Ego or Esteem Needs
These types of needs are like respect, recognition, status, praise, prestige, etc. All people have a need or desire for a stable, firmly based, high evaluation of themselves, for self-respect, or self-esteem, and for the esteem of others. By firmly based self-esteem, we mean that which is soundly based upon real capacity, achievement and respect from others. The desire for strength, for achievement, for adequacy,for confidence in the face of the world, and for independence and freedom, for reputation or prestige (defining it as respect or esteem from other people), recognition, attention, importance or appreciation are esteem needs.
   Satisfaction of the self-esteem need leads to feelings of self confidence, worth, strength, capability and adequacy of being useful and necessary in the world. Lack of these needs produces feelings of inferiority, of weakness and of helplessness.
Self Actualization Needs
These types of needs include creativity, self development, self fulfilment, etc. Even if all prior needs are satisfied, we may still often (if not always) expect that a new discontent and restlessness will soon develop, unless the individual is doing what he is fitted for. A musician must make music, an artist must paint, a poet must write, if he is to be ultimately happy. What a man can be, he must be. This need we may call self-actualization.
   It refers to the desire for self-fulfilment, namely, to the tendency for him to become actualized in what he is potentially. This tendency might be phrased as the desire to become more and more what one is, to become everything that one is capable of becoming. The specific form that these needs will take will of course vary greatly from person to person. In one individual it may take the form of the desire to be an ideal mother, In another it may be expressed athletically, and in still another it may be expressed in painting pictures or in inventions. It is not necessarily a creative urge although in people who have any capacities for creation it will take this form.
	2.4. HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDEX	15
   The clear emergence of these needs rests upon prior satisfaction of the physiological, safety, love and esteem needs.
	2.4	Human Development Index
A tool developed by the United Nations to measure and rank countries ’ levels of social and economic development based on four criteria: Life expectancy at birth, mean years of schooling, expected years of schooling and gross national income per capita.
   The HDI makes it possible to track changes in development levels over time and to compare development levels in different countries. UNDP publishes Human Development Report (HDR). The first HDR introduced a new way of measuring development by combining indicators of life expectancy , educational attainment and income into a composite human development index, the HDI. The breakthrough for the HDI was the creation of a single statistic which was to serve as a frame of reference for both social and economic development. The index also shows that countries with lots of income do not always spend that money in ways that create high life expectancies or education levels. The HDI sets a minimum and a maximum for each dimension, called goalposts, and then shows where each country stands in relation to these goalposts, expressed as a value between 0 and 1.
   HDI shows the relation between life expectancy, education and income. The report shows the poor people are lower at the Energy Ladder.

Figure 2.4.2: Energy Ladder diagram for income vs Fuel/Energy Service.
   The report published by UNDP/World Bank on 2013 shows Norway on 1st place with HDI of 0.944, electricity consumption per capita 23549.68992, income per capita(PPPUS$)63,909 and Nepal in 145th position with HDI of 0.540, electricity consumption per capita of 90.9531266 and income per capita(PPPUS$)2,194.
   The Human Development Index (HDI) is a summary measure of average achievement in key dimensions of human development: a long and healthy life, being knowledgeable and have a decent standard of living. The HDI is the geometric mean of normalized indices for each of the three dimensions.
   The health dimension is assessed by life expectancy at birth component of the HDI is calculated using a minimum value of 20 years and maximum value of 85 years. The education component of the HDI is measured by mean of years of schooling for adults aged 25 years and expected years of schooling for children of school entering age. Mean years of schooling is estimated by UNESCO Institute for Statistics based on educational attainment data from censuses and surveys available in its database. Expected years of schooling estimates are based on enrolment by age at all levels of education. This indicator is produced by UNESCO Institute for Statistics. Expected years of schooling is capped at 18 years. The indicators are normalized using a minimum value of zero and maximum aspirational values of 15 and 18 years respectively. The two indices are combined into an education index using arithmetic mean.
   The standard of living dimension is measured by gross national income per capita. The goalpost for minimum income is $100 (PPP) and the maximum is $75,000 (PPP). The minimum value for GNI per capita, set at $100, is justified by the considerable amount of unmeasured subsistence and nonmarket production in economies close to the minimum that is not captured in the official data. The HDI uses the logarithm of income, to reflect the diminishing importance of income with increasing GNI. The scores for the three HDI dimension indices are then aggregated into a composite index using geometric mean. Refer to Technical notes for more details.
   The HDI does not reflect on inequalities, poverty, human security, empowerment, etc. The HDRO offers the other composite indices as broader proxy on some of the key issues of human development, inequality, gender disparity and human poverty.
   A fuller picture of a country’s level of human development requires analysis of other indicators and information presented in the statistical annex of the report.
2.5 Current Energy Trends, Demand and Supply of Energy in World and Nepal
2.5.1	Energy Trends, Demand and Supply in World
(https://sushil99.wordpress.com/2009/03/12/electricity-crisis-in-nepal-what-can-be-a-viable-solution/) Energy demand is expected to increase considerably in the coming years as the result of population growth and economic development (EIA, 2007). Many people in the world are currently experiencing dramatic shifts in lifestyle as their economies make the transition from a subsistence to an industrial or service base. The largest increases in energy demand will take place in developing countries where the proportion of global energy consumption is expected to increase from 46 to 58 percent between 2004 and 2030 (EIA, 2007). Per capita consumption figures are, however, likely to remain well below those in Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) countries.
   Energy consumption in developing countries is projected to grow at an average annual rate of 3 percent from 2004 to 2020. In industrialized countries, where national economies are mature and population growth is expected to be relatively low, the demand for energy is projected to grow at the lower rate of 0.9 percent per year, albeit from a much higher starting point. Energy consumption in developing regions is projected to surpass that in industrialized regions by 2010. About half of the increase in global energy demand by 2030 will be for power generation and one- fifth for transport needs mostly in the form of petroleum-based fuels (EIA, 2007).
   Much of the increase in energy demand will result from rapid economic growth in Asian economies, especially China and India. Energy demand in the developing countries of Asia is projected to grow at an average rate of 3.7 percent per year, far higher than any other region. Asia will more than double its energy consumption over the next 20 years, and is expected to account for around 65 percent of the total increase in energy demand for all developing countries. Although the energy consumption of developing countries in other regions is expected to grow at a slower pace than in Asia, rates are still expected to exceed the global average. While all regions will play a role in future energy supply and demand, the enormous consumption increases projected in Asia make the region of key interest in future energy development.
   The vast majority of the world’s energy is generated from non-renewable sources, specifically oil, coal and gas. Just over 13 percent of global energy is derived from renewable sources, 10.6 percent of which from combustible renewables and renewable municipal waste. The remainder of renewable energy comes from hydro-, geothermal, solar, wind, and tidal and wave sources.
2.5. CURRENT ENERGY TRENDS, DEMAND AND SUPPLY OF ENERGY IN WORLD AND NEPAL17

Figure 2.5.1: Total marketed energy consumption.

   Projections of total global energy consumption show that between 2004 and 2030, fossil fuels will provide the bulk of the increase, with nuclear and other sources providing relatively minor contributions in absolute terms. In percentage terms, gas and coal are likely to show the greatest change with increases of 65 and 74 percent respectively. Oil consumption is expected to increase by 42 percent while nuclear and renewables, starting from a much lower baseline, are expected to increase by 44 and 61 percent respectively. The ultimate contributions from different sources will be highly dependent on policy directions.
	2.5.2	Energy Trends, Demand and Supply in Nepal
About 6,000 rivers, with a total length of about 45,000 km with an annual discharge of 220 billion cubic meters of water are available in the country. The commercial potential of hydro-power in Nepal are said to be about 83,000 MW and 42,000 MW respectively. So far only about 603 MW have been connected to peak load system, which constitute about 1.88% of total energy supply. Forests supply nearly 78% of the total energy requirement of the country, and also provide 50% of fodder for livestock purpose. On average Nepal has 6.8 sunshine hours per day, i.e. 2,482 sunshine hours per year with the intensity of solar insolation ranging from 3.9 to 5.1 kWh/m2/day. (National average is about 4.7kWh/m2/day). Though significant wind potential is noted to be available in mountainous region (Mustang district, Khumbu region,Palpa, Ramechhap, Karnali Chisapani, Jumla) no proper wind mapping of Nepal has been done so far.
   Energy consumption by source in Nepal can be divided into three categories: traditional, commercial and renewable. The traditional source meets the bulk of total energy consumption with an 85.5 per cent share, followed by commercial and renewable energy sources at 13.54 per cent and 0.61 per cent, respectively. Fuel wood, agriculture residue and animal residue provide 88.68 per cent, 4.85 per cent and
6.47 per cent of the total traditional energy consumption, respectively. Nepal is at lowest in the list of

Figure 2.5.3: Total global marketed energy consumption by source in 2004 and projected for 2030.
ascending hierarchy in per capita electrical energy consumption among the other SAARC countries which accounts just 68 KWh in 2003, a slightly inclined from 35 in 1990 status.
Present Trend
National energy demand of Nepal is 11.6 million units. The energy system manages to support demand of 6.2 million units of energy which account to be 55 per cent of the demand. The total installed capacity of hydro plants is 619.38 MW and runs with production capacity of 276MW at present. The annual demand of electricity has been steadily inclined by 9.3 per cent which indicates the new plant of size 60-80 MW addition to meet the growing need of domestic market. It has been a tough time to NEA to manage even 326 MW power at its mettle. The shortage of 534 MW power over the demand has pushed to darkest years in the history of electricity development and crippling hours of lead shedding has slowly turned to be way of life among people. Thus, Government of Nepal has declared ”National Electricity Crisis” in Nepal.
Causes
1. Supply lag over demand
2. Monopoly of NEA
3. Resource deficit
4. Inadequate private investment
5. Failure to meet development target
6. Seasonal variation in supply
7. Lack of timely maintenance
8. Lack of chain development initiative
Effects
1. Withering linkages: Energy is an important input in production process in an economy power shortage has bound industries to cut down production heavily if not shut sown factories both service and goods reduction industries of small to larger scale have been struggling to exist.
2. Reduces national revenue and income: The power cuts has drastically declined the production the revenue of government collected informs of taxes and fees /prices is being low. As there is direct as well as spell over effects of hydro projects in GDP and per capita income, the development in the sector helps to ease the livelihoods of people and increase the income.
3. Cut-down of jobs: Due to weakening financial strength many workers have already been laid off and is seems to continue unless regular power resumes.
	2.6. INTRODUCTION TO GLOBAL WARMING	19
4. Increment of social crimes: There has been frequent report of increased social crimes such as incidence of theft rubbery at the time of load shedding.
5. Reduction in investment: Power is a pre-condition for investment and no investor would like to invest in such places where no power is available 24hrs for industry.
Issues
1. Institutional development: The ongoing problem definitely doesn’t deny the fact of failure and supports the voice to arrangement of independent entity in-charge of energy development.
2. Alternative sources: Energy in Nepal has been envisaged as hydropower due to its potentiality and coverage. Till date, alternative sources of energy are taken as for rural setting where national grid takes years to connect. Harvest of solar power help even the urban dwellers to meet their household demand.
3. Public-private partnership: It is the only way to generate resources to fill the resource gap prevailed in development sector in Nepal. It curtails aid syndrome and sever conditionality intermingle with it.
4. Political commitment: Political commitment is the must for sustainable energy development consensus based policy on energy sector is needed among the brands to capitalize national potential.
5. Micro-macro project debate: The scope of power plants is matter of national debate even among the policy makers. They clearly saw in two contrasting opinions. Some advocate on small hydroplants for rural electrification and claims to be realistic, given the present resources constraints and feasibility. The need of larger project is the only options as other urges.
6. Integrated energy development: The potential alternative sources are not developed at satisfactory level yet manage their existence at rural settings. Integrated energy policy (IEP) is an issue in the situation such as envisaged in power sector now-a-days.
7. Infrastructure development: Access road and transmission line to connect national grid are essential pre-condition for any projects. It is blame that PPA of many projects is subjected to the availability of such infrastructures. License holders and private entrepreneurs are not in position to start their proposed projects due to lack of such infrastructure.
	2.6	Introduction to Global Warming
Global warming is the term used to describe a gradual increase in the average temperature of the Earth’s atmosphere and its oceans, a change that is believed to be permanently changing the Earth’s climate. Global warming is caused by emission of Green House Gas(GHG) due to natural and man made processes

Figure 2.6.1: Temperature variation in earth.
which will not allow sunlight to reflect back from earth and cause green house effect causing temperature rise in earth.
Radiation balance change can be done by:
• By changing the incoming solar radiation
• By changing the fraction of solar radiation that is reflected (called ’albedo’)
• by altering the long wave radiation from Earth back towards space
Atmospheric constituents changes are expressed in radiative forcings. The global atmospheric concentration of carbon dioxide has increased from a preindustrial value of about 280 ppm to 379 ppm in 2005. The annual carbon dioxide concentration growth ratewas larger during the last 10 years(19952005 average: 1.9 ppm per year) years (19952005 average: 1.9 ppm per year). Fossil fuel use with land-use change are the primary sources. The global atmospheric concentration of methane hasincreased from a preindustrial value of about 715 ppb to 1732 ppb in the early 1990s, and was 1774 ppb in 2005. The global atmospheric nitrous oxide concentration increased from a pre-industrial value of about 270 ppb to 319 ppb in 2005.
   A concept used for quantitative comparisons of the strength of different human and natural agents in causing climate change(Wm?2). Human activities and natural processes cause direct and indirect changes in climate change drivers. These changes result in specific RF changes, either positive or negative and non initial radiative effects. There is very high confidence that the global average net effect of human activities since 1750 has been one of warming, witha radiative forcing of +1.6 [+0.6 to +2.4]Wm?2.
   Most countries are parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), whose ultimate objective is to prevent dangerous anthropogenic climate change.The UNFCCC have adopted a range of policies designed to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and to assist in adaptation to global warming. Parties to the UNFCCC have agreed that deep cuts in emissions are required, and that future global warming should be limited to below 2?C (3.6?F) relative to the pre-industrial level.
   Future climate change and associated impacts will be different from region to region around the globe. The effects of an increase in global temperature include a rise in sea levels and a change in the amount and pattern of precipitation, as well as a probable expansion of subtropical deserts. Warming is expected to be strongest in the Arctic, with the continuing retreat of glaciers, permafrost and sea ice. Other likely effects of the warming include more frequent extreme weather events including heat waves, droughts, heavy rainfall, and heavy snowfall; ocean acidification; and species extinctions due to shifting temperature regimes. Effects significant to humans include the threat to food security from decreasing crop yields and the loss of habitat from inundation.
   Over the period 1961 to 2003, global ocean temperature has risen by 0.1?C from the surface to a depth of 700m. From 1961 to 2003, the average rate of sea level rise was 1.8 0.5mmyr?1.
   Out of 2323 glacial lakes reported in Nepal (ICIMOD, 2001), 20 lakes are found potentially dangerous. Almost 20 % of the glaciated area above 5000 m is likely to be snow and glacier free area at an increase of air temperature by 1?C. Such changes in glacier areas are likely to contribute to the development of glacier lakes increasing potential GLOF hazards
	2.6. INTRODUCTION TO GLOBAL WARMING	21
	2.6.1	Kyoto Protocol and Clean Development Mechanism
The Kyoto Protocol is an international treaty, which extends the 1992 United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) that commits State Parties to reduce greenhouse gases emissions, based on the premise that (a) global warming exists and (b) man-made CO2 emissions have caused it. The Kyoto Protocol was adopted in Kyoto, Japan, on 11 December 1997 and entered into force on 16 February 2005. There are currently 192 Parties involved.
   The Kyoto Protocol implemented the objective of the UNFCCC to fight global warming by reducing greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere to ’a level that would prevent dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate system’ (Art. 2). The Protocol is based on the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities: it puts the obligation to reduce current emissions on developed countries on the basis that they are historically responsible for the current levels of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere.
   Three ”flexibility mechanisms” identified in the Kyoto Protocol can be use to meet their GHG reduction targets are:
• CDM
• JI
• IET
   The CDM is the only mechanism under the Kyoto Protocol that involves developing countries, or non-Annex I countries.
   The Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) is one of the flexibility mechanisms defined in the Kyoto Protocol (IPCC, 2007) that provides for emissions reduction projects which generate Certified Emission Reduction(CER) units which may be traded in emissions trading schemes.
The CDM is defined in Article 12 of the Protocol, and is intended to meet two objectives:
• To assist parties not included in Annex I in achieving sustainable development and in contributing to the ultimate objective of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), which is to prevent dangerous climate change; and
• To assist parties included in Annex I in achieving compliance with their quantified emission limitation and reduction commitments (greenhouse gas (GHG) emission caps)
   Where, Annex I parties are those countries that are listed in Annex I of the treaty, and are the industrialized countries. Non-Annex I parties are developing countries.

Figure 2.6.3: CDM baseline.
   The CDM addresses the second objective by allowing the Annex I countries to meet part of their emission reduction commitments under the Kyoto Protocol by buying Certified Emission Reduction units from CDM emission reduction projects in developing countries. The CDM is supervised by the CDM Executive Board (CDM EB) and is under the guidance of the Conference of the Parties (COP/MOP) of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC).
   The CDM allows industrialized countries to buy CERs and to invest in emission reductions where it is cheapest globally.
CER and Baseline Concepts
The baseline for a CDM project activity is the scenario that reasonably represents the anthropogenic emissions by sources of greenhouse gases that would occur in the absence of the proposed project activity. The baseline is defined on a project specific basis. The baseline refers to hypothetical future emissions that would occur if the proposed CDM project activity is not implemented(see Figure 2.6.3). Where, to = Starting year of CDM
E0t = Total emission without CDM
ECDMt = Total emission with CDM
CER = E0t - ECDMt TOE CO2 reduction(tradable in international market)
Eligible Projects for CDM
Renewable energy, Fuel switching, End-use energy efficiency improvements , Supply-side energy efficiency improvements, Waste handling and disposal, Agriculture (reduction of CH4 and N2O emissions), Industrial processes (CO2 from cement, HFCs, etc.), Sink projects (only afforestation and reforestation. The small scale CDM projects can be:
1. Type I: RE projects with a maximum output capacity equivalent to up to 15 megawatts (or an appropriate equivalent)
2. Type II: energy-efficiency improvement project activities which reduce energy consumption on the supply and/or demand side by up to the equivalent of 15 gigawatt-hours per year
3. Type III: other project activities that both reduce anthropogenic emissions by sources and directly emit less than 15 kilotonnesof CO2 equivalent (CO2e) annually.
CDM Opportunities in Nepal
1. Renewable energy: CDM can be helpful for power generation and utilizations like Micro hydro power generation, Solar energy power: heating, lighting, power, Biomass based energy: power, heating, Wind based power generation ,Geo-thermal energy utilization: heating, cooling, power generation.
2. Transportation: Low GHG emitting vehicles, Bus Rapid Transit Projects, Energy efficiency by using , retrofit technologies
3. Waste Management: Methane recovery, Capturing/Avoiding the landfill gas emissions, Wasteto-energy and Biological treatment of the biomass
4. Afforestation / Reforestation: Creation of carbon sinks in addition to what is required under regulations, reforestation and afforestation of degraded land.
5. Bio-fuels Plant oil production and use for transport application , production of biodiesel based on waste oils and/or waste fats from biogenic origin for use as fuel.
6. Energy Efficiency: Process optimization: new technology, retrofits, building energy efficienct power generation, distribution, lighting technology.
2.7 Conventional/Non conventional and Renewable/Non Renewable Energy Sources
2.7.1	Conventional/Non conventional Energy Sources
Conventional Energy Sources
The conventional sources of Energy includes : Coal, petroleum natural gas, hydropower etc. Since, their uses are practiced for a long time. They are exhaust able except water. They cause pollution when used, as they emit smoke and ash. They are very expensive to be maintained, stored and transmitted as they are carried over long distance through transmission grid and lines.
2.7. CONVENTIONAL/NON CONVENTIONAL AND RENEWABLE/NON RENEWABLE ENERGY SOURCES23
Non Conventional Energy Sources
The resources which are yet in the process of development over the past few years. It includes solar, wind, tidal, biogas, and biomass, geothermal. They are inexhaustible. They are generally pollution free and are less expensive due to local use and easy to maintain. The Non-conventional sources of energy includes : Solar Energy, tidal energy, geo-thermal energy, wind energy, nuclear energy etc.
	2.7.2	Renewable/Non Renewable Energy Sources
Renewable Energy Sources
Our renewable energy resources will never run out. Their supply is not limited. There are no fuel costs either. And they typically generate far less pollution than fossil fuels. Renewable energy resources include: wind energy, water energy, such as wave machines, tidal barrages and hydroelectric power geothermal energy, solar energy, biomass energy.
   However, there are some negatives to generating renewable energy. For example, wind farms are noisy and may spoil the view of people who live near them. The amount of electricity generated depends on the strength of the wind. Also, if there is no wind, there is no electricity.
Non Renewable Energy Sources
There is a limited supply of non-renewable energy resources, which will eventually run out. They include: fossil fuels, such as coal, oil and natural gas nuclear fuels, such as uranium, etc.
   Fossil fuels release carbon dioxide when they burn, which adds to the greenhouse effect and increases global warming. Of the three fossil fuels, coal produces the most carbon dioxide, for a given amount of energy released, while natural gas generates the least.
   The fuel for nuclear power stations is relatively cheap. But the power stations themselves are expensive to build. It is also very expensive to dismantle old nuclear power stations or store radioactive waste, which is a dangerous health hazard.
	2.7.3	Nuclear power stations
The main nuclear fuels are uranium and plutonium, both of which are radioactive metals. Nuclear fuels are not burned to release energy. Instead, heat is released from changes in the nucleus.
   Just as with power stations burning fossil fuels, the heat energy is used to boil water. The kinetic energy in the expanding steam spins turbines, which drive generators to produce electricity.
Some advantages are unlike fossil fuels, nuclear fuels do not produce carbon dioxide.
   And some disadvantages are like fossil fuels, nuclear fuels are non-renewable energy resources. And if there is an accident, large amounts of radioactive material could be released into the environment. In addition, nuclear waste remains radioactive and is hazardous to health for thousands of years. It must be stored safely.
